{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2708
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww13780\viewh13880\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 # Nouns\
\
Since words that can be verbs ARE verbs, nouns are usually a modification of a verb using derivative morphemes.\'a0 However, in **Verbum**, there is the concept of Primary Nouns based on the universal elements (_Earth[Land], Spirit, Air, Water, Fire, Mineral [including Metal], Wood [including plants], Time, Location, and Life (Man, Beings, Animals, Insects, Food, etc.)_. There is a further set of Primary Nouns associated with _Space, Direction, Shape and Measurement_. Most nouns that fall into the category of Things are derived through morphemes applied to Verbs. For example: _Aerodynamics_ is [_Thing used to Facilitate_] (**l\uc0\u333 **-) [_to Fly_] (**gol**) **l\u333 gol** while a _Plane_ is [_That which you..._] (**l\u257 **) [_to Fly_] (**gol**) **l\u257 gol**.\'a0 In **Verbum**, the rule is the word takes on the simpler or basic meaning.\'a0 So, _Plane_ would be interpreted as a small single prop personal aircraft like a Cessna. Variations of _Plane_ would be modified by the Scale morphemes [_Less_(**v\u275 -,** **v\u257 -**, **v\u333 **-), _More_(**ve-, va-, vo-**)] to get **v\u275 l\u257 gol**, which would likely be an _Ultralight_ while a **vel\u257 gol** would be an _Airliner_ or _Jet_ and adding the _Self_ (-**t\u275 r**) morpheme to mean Self-Flight would be combined with a smaller scale morpheme to mean a _Drone_ (**v\u257 l\u257 golt\u275 r**).\'a0\
\
A note about parts of things: A Plane has a Wing and so does a Bird, which represent the arms. The Noun modifying morpheme **l\uc0\u363 **- represents something physical associated with an object. So, a Wing would be [_that which (physically) \'85_][_flys_] (**l\u363 gol**).\'a0 When its necessary to create a word or meaning from the combination of nouns, we use the conjunction morpheme (**de\'92**).\'a0 So, a _Walkway_ would be _Walk_(**gil**)[_Conjuction_](**de\'92**) _way_(**ed**) **gil de\'92ed**.\'a0 Notice that the verb form was used (**gil**) and not the noun (**g\u333 gil**).\'a0 The Conjunction implies this is a Noun, However, if a combined word creates a verb meaning, then the word can be differentiated into a noun by adding the leading **g\u333 -** morpheme.  An example of this is the word for _Bird_ which is defined as _Flight Animal_.  Flight is the Noun Equivalent of _to Fly_, so in this case we would use the noun in the comjunction: **g\u333 gol de'gojo**.\
\
## Phonology\
\
Primary noun Phonology is **CCVC** but only recognizes \uc0\u7791  (_THistle_) and \u347  (_SHoe_) as diphthongs to represent the initial CC of the Phonology.\
\
## Conceptual Morphemes\
\
The following chart show how verbs are modified into nouns.\'a0 \
\
|||||\
|--- |--- |--- |--- |\
|**Name**|**Morpheme**|**Meaning**|**Example**|\
|Actor|s\uc0\u333 -|One who is...|Manger - **s\u333 r\u257 g\u257 n** (to manage)|\
|Recipient|-s\uc0\u333 |One effected by...|Corpse - **r\u333 ganos\u333 ** (to die)|\
|Implement|l\uc0\u333 -|Used to facilitate...|Classes - **l\u333 lan** (to see)|\
|Process|l\uc0\u275 -|Continual process of...|Vision - **l\u275 lan** (to see)|\
|Physical|l\uc0\u363 -|That which (physically)...|Eyes - **l\u363 lan** (to see)|\
|Performs|l\uc0\u257 -|That which you...|Aerodynamics - **l\u257 gol** (to fly)|\
|Result|l\uc0\u299 -|Results of...|Game - **l\u299 r\u257 dek** (to play)|\
|Use|g\uc0\u333 -|Use as Noun/Adjective|Work - **g\u333 r\u257 dan** (to work)|\
|Location|n\uc0\u257 -|Location where ... occurs|Theater - **n\u257 r\u333 d\u333 m** (to perform)|\
|Authority|-do|Authoritative use of...|State - **st\uc0\u333 rdo** (as in land)|\
\
## Animals (go') gojo [g\uc0\u593 .\u657 \u593 ]\
\
Animals (gojo means Animal) are a special case of noun that uses a qualifier prior to a Proper Noun to cover each animal which can be represented by its standard name or Latinized equivalent translated into **Verbum** phonology.  Animals use the (**go\'92**- the \'91 causes a gutteral pause) morpheme prefix to notify listeners that the next word or set of words is an animal so that no confusion occurs if for example an animal name coincides with a verb or noun in **Verbum**, such as _dog_. As mentioned, Animal names use **Verbum** phonology. For example: _Giraffe_ become **jiraf** which is the closest sound. The full name for a _Giraffe_ would be **go\'92jiraf**. This is a little different when we consider _Gibbon_. The G changes sound so in **Verbum** it would be **go\'92gibon**. Again, this demonstrates the importance of the prefix morpheme.  Also, due to **Verbum** VSO order rules, descriptors for animals, or noun in general for that matter, are placed after the Object. So, in the case of something like a _Monitor Lizard_ the proper notation would be: **go\'92lizord monot\uc0\u333 r** or _Great White Shark_, **go\'92shork w\u299 t gr\u257 t.**\
\
Bird is referred to as _Flight Animal_.  **g\uc0\u333 gol de\'92gojo**\
\
## Insects (ga'-) gajo [g\'e6.\uc0\u657 \u593 ]\
\
So, like the other categories here, **gajo** means _Insects_ while **z\uc0\u333 gajo** means Informal _insect_ or _Bug_.\
\
## Reptiles & Amphibians (ge') gejo [g\uc0\u603 .\u657 \u593 ]\
\
While _Reptile_ is **gejo**, _Amphibian_ is referred to as \'93Water Retile\'94, **swam de\'92gejo**. It is also allowed to use a proper name here.\'a0 So, _Amphibian_ can be naturalize with the Proper Noun to get, **g\uc0\u363 \'92amfib\u275 \'92an** as that is a class of animal.\
\
## Food (gi'-)\
\
The extensiveness of food and food type necessitates a morphological construction for food similar to Animals.\'a0 Food is rewriting in **Verbum** phonology with the prefix **gi\'92-** added. The \'91 causes the same guttural stop like with animals.\'a0 For example: _Bread_ (**gi\'92bred**), _Soup_ (**gi\'92s\uc0\u363 p**), and _Steak_ (**gi\'92st\u257 k**)\
\
## Elements (g\uc0\u257 -) g\u257 jo [ge\u618 .\u657 \u593 ]\
\
Naturally occurring elements (**g\uc0\u257 jo**) that are a part of the periodic table use the English name spelled using **Verbum** phonology.\'a0 Each element name is preceded by the qualifier morpheme (**g\u257 -**) to identify that the next work is an element. So, when using the word _Gold_, in **Verbum** it would be **g\u257 g\u333 ld** and _Helium_ would be **g\u257 h\u275 l\u275 \'92um**.\
\
## Measurements (g\uc0\u275 -) g\u275 jo [gi:.\u657 \u593 ]\
\
There are a few base measures (**g\uc0\u275 jo**) that have distinct **Verbum** words like _Meter_ (**bran**[br\'e6n) and _Mile_ (**br\u257 n**[bre\u618 n]) but when it comes to more obscure measures like _Volt, Farad, and Newton_ the morpheme qualifier (**g\u275 -**) is added to identify the next word as a measure using **Verbum** phonology of the English measure. So, a _Radian_ becomes **g\u275 r\u257 d\u275 \'92an** and a _Joule_ becomes **g\u275 j\u363 l**.\
\
## Plants & Trees\
\
When referring to _Plants_ and _Trees_ (not fruits or things considered food \'96 see above) use the Proper Name morpheme (**g\uc0\u363 -**) as an Adjective to the word for _Plant_ (**trim**) or _Tree_ (**trom**).\'a0 So, when saying _Birch Tree_, you would say **trom g\u363 ber\u263 ** or a _Rose Plant_, **trim g\u363 r\u333 z**\
\
## Noun Cases\
\
### Genitive Cases\
\
In **Verbum**, when a proper noun is used it is spelled how the original language sounds, just like with animals, and the Proper Name prefix (**g\uc0\u363 -**) is added to let the listener know that should the following word have a definition in **Verbum**, it is to be interpreted as a person, place, of thing\'92s name. When referring to the genitive case in a sentence construction, the proper name will precede the possessive item. The possessive morpheme (**m\u275 -**) is then added to the possessed item. For example:\
\
Proper Name \'96 _Stacy_ (English), **g\uc0\u363 st\u257 s\u275 ** \
\
Possessive \'96 _Stacy\'92s Mom_ (English), **g\uc0\u363 st\u257 s\u275  m\u275 monow\u257 ** \
\
### Locative & Motion Cases\
\
||||\
|--- |--- |--- |\
|**LOCATION**|**Morpheme**|**Example**|\
|Adessive|t\uc0\u299 -|**Near/at/by** the house|\
|Antessive|t\uc0\u275 -|**Before** the house|\
|Apudessive|-t\uc0\u275 |**Next/Beside** the house|\
|Inessive|t\uc0\u333 -|**Inside/In** the house|\
|Intrative|-t\uc0\u333 |**Between** the house|\
|Subessive|t\uc0\u363 -|**Under/Below** the table|\
|Potessive|-t\uc0\u363 |**Behind** the house|\
|Comitative|-t\uc0\u299 |**With** the cart|\
|Superessive|to-|**On/Above** the table|\
\
||||\
|--- |--- |--- |\
|**MOTION**|**Morpheme**|**Example**|\
|Ablative|-to|**Away/Out** from the house|\
|Allative|t\uc0\u257 -|**To/Towards** the house|\
|Perlative|-t\uc0\u257 |**Through** the house|\
|Superlative|tu-|**Over** the fence|\
\
Here are examples of the LM morpheme added to a word.\
\
\'93at the house (_place where you live_)\'94 \'96 **t\uc0\u299 n\u257 r\u333 ban**\
\
\'93through the house (_place where you live_)\'94 \'96 **n\uc0\u257 r\u333 bant\u257 **\
\
\'93on the table (_place where you eat_)\'94 \'96 **ton\uc0\u257 d\u275 n**\
\
It should be noted that the noun case morphemes can be combined with other derivative nouns to increase the meaning and create new nouns. However, to differentiate between a LM case morpheme and a new noun, the LM \'93t\'94 is changed to the \'93\uc0\u7791 \'94 (_Thistle_). For Example:\
\
_To See_ (**lan**)\
\
\'93_That which you_ [**l\uc0\u257 **] _See_, _through_ [**\u7791 \u257 **]\'94 \'96 _Glass_ (**l\u257 lan\u7791 \u257 **)\
\
Here are some other examples:\
\
"_Used to Facilitate See(ing) through_" \'96 _Window_ (**l\uc0\u333 lan\u7791 \u257 **)\
\
"_Used to Facilitate See(ing) out_" \'96 _Binoculars_ (**\uc0\u7791 ol\u333 lan**)\
\
"_Used to Facilitate See(ing) in(side)_" \'96 _Microscope_ (**\uc0\u7791 \u333 l\u333 lan**)\
\
## Other Noun Morphemes\
\
### Hierarchy\
\
The Hierarchy morphemes refer to the position a noun has in relation to the base noun.\
\
||||\
|--- |--- |--- |\
|**Name**|**Morpheme**|**Example**|\
|Lower Rank/Form|y\uc0\u257 -|**mo** (man) - **y\u257 mo** (boy)|\
|Higher Rank/Form|-y\uc0\u257 |**mo** (man) - **moy\u257 ** (master)|\
|Sidelong|y\uc0\u333 -|**mo** (man) - **y\u333 mo** (Peer/Partner)|\
|Assistant to|-y\uc0\u333 |**s\u333 r\u275 g\u257 n** (manager) - **s\u333 r\u275 g\u257 ny\u333 ** (Secretary)|\
\
### Relationship\
\
The Relationship morphemes refer to the relationship a noun has in relation to the base noun.\
\
||||\
|--- |--- |--- |\
|**Name**|**Morpheme**|**Example**|\
|Child of|w\uc0\u257 -|**mo** (man) - **w\u257 mo** (son)|\
|Parent of|-w\uc0\u257 |**mo** (man) - **mow\u257 ** (Father)|\
|Equivalent|w\uc0\u363 -|**mo** (man) - **w\u363 mo** (Brother)|\
|Joint|-w\uc0\u363 |**mo** (man) - **mow\u363 ** (Husband)|\
\
### Categorization\
\
The Categorization morphemes refer to how a noun is categorized in relation to the base noun.\
\
||||\
|--- |--- |--- |\
|**Name**|**Morpheme**|**Example**|\
|Genre/Family|y\uc0\u363 -|**mo** (man) - **y\u363 mo** (Person)|\
|Classification|-y\uc0\u363 |**mo** (man) - **moy\u363 ** (Male)|\
\
Some people may assume that the Genre or Family of Man would be _Human_ or _Mankind_. This is differentiated in **Verbum** by the All-Inclusive morpheme (**s\uc0\u257 -**). So, _Mankind_ would be **s\u257 mo** (all Man) while _Human_ is the formal version (**z\u275 s\u257 mo**)\
\
Note:\'a0 Homo Sapiens is considered a proper noun from Latin and can be incorporated into **Verbum** by interpreting the pronunciation of the word(s) and combining it with the Proper Name morpheme (**g\uc0\u363 -**) to represent the word **g\u363 h\u333 m\u333 s\u257 p\u275 \'92ans**.\
}